What we're going to do
now is start taking a look
at the various phases in Java
parallel streams and peek
under the hood.
And this, of course, is
important to give you
a bigger and better
understanding of what's
actually taking place behind
the scenes when you run
your parallel streams programs.
A Java parallel stream
implements a variant
of the famous MapReduce
model, which is optimized
for multicore processors.
If you're familiar with
MapReduce from other contexts,
you probably know it's use
for things like cluster-based
computing, where you end up
being able to map your tasks--
your jobs-- to multiple
computers in a cluster,
and then be able to
get the results back
and reduce them
to a final result.
A good example of this would be
something like Google's search
engine, which uses
many computers to do
the searching efficiently
and in parallel.
It turns out that
Java parallel streams
works a little differently,
although the basic concepts are
very similar.
In particular, the MapReduce
model for Java parallel
streams works on a
multicore processor
rather than a cluster.
If you want to use
cluster-style programming,
you'd have to work with a
different type of programming
middleware, things like
perhaps Hadoop or Sparks.
Naturally, the topics we'll
cover here for parallel streams
could also work in
that context as well.
This diagram gives a somewhat
whimsical, but fairly realistic
rendition of the
MapReduce process.
So imagine we want
to make a sandwich
and we've got a bunch of various
components in our refrigerator.
We have bread, and lettuce, and
meat, and cheese, and tomatoes.
So the first phase
of this is basically
to partition the
elements in our fridge
and perhaps put them
out on the table.
And then what we're going
to do is do the map phase,
where, perhaps in parallel,
different people could slice up
the bread, shred
the lettuce, slice
the meat, slice the cheese,
slice the tomatoes, and so on.
And then a different
group of people
could take those various
slices and shredded lettuce,
and then reduce them by
putting together sandwiches.
And if you play
your cards right,
you could end up having
a nice little pipeline
of parallel processing
in order to be
able to make your sandwiches
more quickly and more
effectively.
Now, obviously,
we're not dealing
with making sandwiches here.
We're dealing with writing
computer programs that
want to take good advantage
of multicore processors.
So what actually happens, of
course, in a parallel stream is
this split, apply, and combine
data processing strategy
that we've talked about
multiple times earlier.
And now we're really
going to get a chance
to talk about the
parallel aspects of that.
So if you recall,
the three phases
in the split-apply-combine
paradigm
are, first, split, which will
end up recursively partitioning
a data source up into chunks.
And you can think of this
kind of like slicing up
pieces of pizza, as we
show here in the picture.
We'll be talking about this
in more detail in an upcoming
lesson.
But for right now, as
part of the overview,
basically, you end
up with a bunch
of chunks that is
independent and essentially
an atomic subset of a portion or
partition of the original data
source.
And this partitioning may
take place recursively
in multiple steps in order to
be able to get the original data
into small enough pieces
to be processed effectively
in parallel.
The way this is done, of
course, in Java and Java Streams
is through spliterators.
So spliterators are used
to partition data sources--
in particular,
collections-- in Java.
The tryAdvance
method, which we've
talked about in previous weeks,
is used for both sequential
and parallel streams.
And of course, the
other important method,
which is called trySplit, is
only used for parallel streams.
And we'll talk a lot about
that as we go further
in these lessons, and in this
week, and in subsequent weeks.
Each Java collection comes
with a predefined spliterator.
As I've mentioned before, this
spliterator implementation
is provided as a default
method in the Java collection
interface.
And you can see how spliterator
has a default implementation
there, which, of course,
can be overridden
by various containers
and collections that
will implement Collection
either directly or indirectly.
And you can also see
how the parallelStream
method uses spliterator.
so.
If you take a look here, you
can see how the parallelStream
method uses a spliterator along
with the StreamSupport.stream
method to create
a parallel stream.
And you can see it's
a parallel stream
because the true
parameter is passed
into StreamSupport.stream.
It's also possible to define
your own custom spliterators.
We've shown some examples of
this before in the context
of our phrase match spliterator
from the sequential search
stream [INAUDIBLE] application
and also with the spliterator
that we used earlier for the
simple search stream example.
We're going to be looking
at other aspects of custom
spliterator here in the
parallel stream section as well.
Not surprisingly,
parallel streams
will perform best
if your data sources
can be split efficiently
and can be split evenly.
And I'll have a whole
discussion of that later,
and I'll show you some results
from performance analysis
that quantifies the differences
between different Java
collections in
terms of how evenly
and how efficiently they
split up their data.
The second phase in this
process is the apply phase.
And unlike the
earlier discussions
we had for sequential streams,
where there was only one
thread, things got a lot more
interesting when we start
dealing with parallel streams.
In this context,
the process chunks--
the chunks that are created
by the spliterator--
are processed in parallel in the
common fork-join thread pool.
And it has to be the
common fork-join pool.
That's the way the streams
are designed to work.
It turns out that the splitting
and applying phases actually
run simultaneously after
certain limits are met,
after you've created
enough chunks.
As part of splitting, those get
fed into the fork joint pool,
and then they start
to run in parallel.
This is not a purely
sequential thing.
The splitting doesn't
take place first,
followed by all the applying.
Instead, they're interleaved,
thereby allowing the program
to start running more quickly
and get results more quickly.
The way that this
works under the hood,
as we'll talk about in
much more detail later,
is by using something
called work stealing.
And this is designed
intentionally
to maximize CPU processor
core utilization.
The goal is to keep things
as busy as possible.
And never let the threads
of the processor cores block
or sleep for any length
of time because that
tends to degrade performance
quite a bit on modern multicore
processors.
Programmers get some
degree of control
of the number of threads in
the common fork-join pool.
We'll talk extensively about
how to do this both here
and the parallel
streams discussion,
as well also later when we
cover the Java fork-join pool
framework itself.
So you'll get a number
of different perspectives
on how to control the number
of threads in the pool.
And the third and final
phase is the combine phase,
which works by joining
a partial result--
which are created in
the different threads
running in the pool, as
part of the apply phase--
into a single so-called
reduced result.
And we'll spend a lot of time
talking about this as well.
This is typically done
by terminal operations
like collect and reduce.
And as we'll see, the collectors
that are used by collect can be
either concurrent, which
means that they have to be
synchronized-- they have to use
accumulators that synchronize
access to a single, shared,
mutable result container--
or they can be non concurrent.
In which case, the collectors
don't have to be synchronized.
And of course, we'll also talk
extensively about that as well.